# DTMF_Shield
The Arduino DTMF Shield and software to program a Kenwood TM-742 series radio

This code and designs all came from Larry Anderton, WA7YLI.  It is released with his expressed permission.

Many thanks to Curt Mills, WE7U, 'the Xastir Guy', who loaned me his functional TM742 Programmer unit, so that I could test my built boards initially,
and to know correct from incorrect, or unexpected, behavior.

License is listed as MIT, but other open source licenses are also acceptable, especially BSD, Mozilla, or GNU 2.0.

Hardware designs are licensed under the TAPR Open Hardware License
 
This consists of:
1) an Arduino Sketch called DTMF_Shield, which runs on an Arduino Uno.  I've recently tested an Uno R3, and it worked.
2) an Arduino shield, called 'DTMF_Shield', that generates DTMF tones and otherwise emulates a Kenwood MC-45DM microphone or equivalent
3) a Visual Studio VB.Net application that, using a DTMF Shield on an Arduino, will program a Kenwood TM-742 series radio
  the two zip files are the original installer and the original Visual Studio source code.  It was called 'UsbTest' then.

"TM742 Programmer - Rev 1 candidate Jul1 1, 2014.zip" is the original installer as provided by WA7YLI.  This is also what the 'initial release' gives you.
https://github.com/TAPR/DTMF_Shield/blob/main/TM742%20Programmer%20-%20Rev%201%20candidate%20Jul1%201%2C%202014.zip

"TM742ApplicationSln.zip" is the original source code from WA7YLI.
https://github.com/TAPR/DTMF_Shield/blob/main/TM742ApplicationSln.zip

"Instructions - readme - updated for Rev 1 Sept13_2015.pdf" original instructions from Larry.
https://github.com/TAPR/DTMF_Shield/blob/main/Instructions%20-%20readme%20-%20updated%20for%20Rev%201%20Sept13_2015.pdf

"TM742 Programming Kit Pictures.docx" - shows the shield board and how to put it on an Arduino.  Note that no power cable is needed by the Arduino in most all
applications, unless your PC is unable to power the Arduino via the USB cable that you use.
https://github.com/TAPR/DTMF_Shield/blob/main/TM742%20Programming%20Kit%20Pictures.docx

If you are using Arduino IDE 1.x, place the Messenger folder inside your Documents\Arduino\libraries folder.  Open the DTMF_Shield sketch.
Use 'upload' to put it onto an Arduino Uno that is plugged in to the computer and recognized.

I've tested this also with Arduino IDE 2.0.  it works, but there wasn't a Documents\Arduino\libraries folder already existing; I had to make it.  But the compile,
and the Upload, also worked as well as with the Arduino IDE 1.x.

I suspect that this project could be modified to easily program the Kenwood TM-732, and possibly TM-733.  It can also be a generic DTMF generating board.
The Arduino is just a serial port that accepts commands that are processed by the DTMF_Shield sketch.  DTMF tones and button presses and such result from this.

Mac and Linux do NOT want to do Windows Forms applications (which is what the programmer app is...) any more. I think that maybe 10 years ago we could create
the app on windows, and run it under Mono.  However, the Mac and Linux seem to use only .Net Core, which does not include support for Windows Forms apps.  It no longer
works that way.  It looks like the way forward is to convert to a Xamarin app.  But I could be very wrong, and chasing alleged unicorns.  Perhaps the way forward is
a command line program that can read the new XML channel list files, and write to the radio that is connected.  Since the UI would be 'command line',
there are not the same problems that a Windows Forms app would have.

What the DTMF_Shield sketch does:
1) it processes a set of serial command strings.  Some are single character, some are multiple character.  These commands/actions are described below.
2) to operate the shield itself, either a command setting a value is sent, a button press is emulated, or a 5 bit command is sent to the DTMF generator chip (HT9200A)
  to generate a tone for 0-9 or A-D.	The chip is enabled, the 5 bits are banged out, and the chip is disabled.  There are appropriate pauses.
	
	a) setting values: accepts "SET_TONE_TIME:" followed by an integer value, or "SET_BUTTON_TIME:" followed by an integer value, "PAUSE: ", which causes a
		pause for TONE_DELAY time (SET_TONE_TIME value) Default values for both are '75'.  All values are in milliseconds
		
	b) receiving the string "0" thru "9" and "A" thru "D" cause that DTMF tone to be generated by the HT9200A chip, for the current TONE_DELAY time.
	
	c) receiving the string "UP" causes the UP button press line to be set for BUTTON_DELAY time (SET_BUTTON_TIME value), then cleared.
    		Similar for "DOWN", "MR", "VFO", and "CALL"
	
Long and short presses are performed by having the TM742 programmer application change the TONE_TIME and BUTTON_TIME appropriately, then returning to the normal value.
I have now implemented additional commands "SET_LONG_PRESS_TIME:" (followed by milliseconds, default is 1.2 seconds or 1200 milliseconds.) and "LONG_MR".
"LONG_MR" is used when programming a custom repeater offset (whole MHz only, +/- 30 MHz), also known as an 'odd split' or non-standard split/offset.

--->>> TRY THE NEW BRANCH! https://github.com/TAPR/DTMF_Shield/tree/main/TM742ApplicationCSharpNew 
This is a very much refactored branch.  It has 'custom/odd/nonstandard' repeater split/offset frequency in whole MHz.  There is a new beta release for its installer.

